---
title: kerbal-gravity-turn
tags: Game, KSP
---

Kerbal 火箭重力转向教程

**Rocket Ascent Profile and Gravity Turn**

This is a beginner-intermediate tutorial on how to do a proper launch and gravity turn with the new aerodynamic model introduced as of version 1.0. This tutorial works for 1.0 to 1.1.

My goal with this tutorial is for you to gain an in-depth understanding of the factors that affect your rocket's behavior during launch. For that, you'll need to go through the entire post, but I'm also including a TLDR as a "cheat sheet":

TL;DR (courtesy of [@kBob](http://forum.kerbalspaceprogram.com/%7B___base_url___%7D/index.php?/profile/102132-kbob/))

1. Turn ON SAS and set throttle to give TWR of ~1.5.
2. Launch!
3. At 50 m/s, perform a pitch over maneuver (tip towards the East until pointing between 5° to 10°).
4. When SAS stabilizes turn OFF (i.e. the control input arrows on the bottom left are all centered). Avoid control inputs, use throttle to control gravity turn (throttle up to turn slower, throttle down to turn faster).
5. At ~40 km, turn SAS ON, pitch down manually towards the horizon and throttle back up.
6. Keep your Ap around 45 seconds in front of you.
7. Adjust pitch and throttle until your Ap reaches desired altitude, then cut your engines, coast to Ap and circularize.

========================================================

**General Notes on Gravity Turn**

You all probably know by this point that to get into orbit you need to go up, above the atmosphere, but you also need to go sideways (i.e. horizontally) very fast. To do this, we could launch straight up until we're out of the atmosphere, then point sideways and accelerate to orbital speed. But that would be very inefficient. We want to launch in a way that we gradually turn sideways while we ascend. This is called a gravity turn. In the new aero (post 1.0), the best way to go is to do [a real gravity turn](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravity_turn); that is, a turn *caused by gravity and aerodynamic forces*, rather than one achieved by actively turning the rocket. It is important to keep this in mind.

**Design Items**

Before even launching, you need to take these design items into consideration when building your rocket:

TWR: Your thrust-to-weight ratio (TWR) at launch should be relatively low, around 1.5, a bit higher for small and light rockets. A higher TWR at the beginning of the launch is inefficient, as you will lose energy to atmospheric drag while crossing the thick air of the lower atmosphere. You will also end up going faster while lower in the atmosphere, which will make you encounter heating issues and risk breaking up your rocket. A higher TWR also makes it harder for your rocket to turn naturally, as gravity will have less influence on its trajectory, making it fly straight and screwing up your gravity turn. If you find your TWR at launch is too high, either use a smaller engine or just throttle down. All rockets will have their TWR go up as the launch progresses due to shedding weight by burning fuel. This is normal and you should manage by reducing throttle throughout the ascent as needed (more on this below). You can check your TWR with the Kerbal Engineering Redux mod (KER) or with MechJeb, or if you're running a stock game, the G Force meter roughly doubles as a TWR meter (if the G Force meter is pointing at 1 your TWR is roughly 1, and so on).

Aerodynamic Stability: You want your rocket to be aerodynamically stable. That means that it will have a natural tendency to fly straight, instead of, say, sideways. Any object that flies through the atmosphere will naturally orient itself with its center of mass (COM) facing forwards relative to its trajectory and its center of drag (COD) facing backwards. You can see this in darts, arrows, badminton cocks, etc. Similarly, you will want have your rocket's COM in front of your COD. This can be tricky because there isn't a COD indicator in the VAB and because the COM of a rocket shifts during ascent due to shedding weight by burning fuel. However, you can mostly get away with it if you just add 3 or 4 winglets or wing surfaces with radial symmetry at the base of the rocket. If your rocket insists on flipping, you need to add more/larger wings at the bottom and/or make your payload more aerodynamic by covering it in a fairing. If that doesn't fix it, it means your COM is shifting so much that it falls behind the center of drag when fuel is burnt. The easiest way to fix this is to add a small fuel tank at the top of the stage that's experiencing the problem and lock it in the VAB (right click on the tank and select the green arrows for both fuel and oxidizer). This fuel tank will act as ballast keeping your COM forward. You can unlock it manually in flight when the rest of the stage's fuel is gone so as to not waste it, and then stage as normal. As a final note on aerodynamic stability, you don't want to make your rocket *too *stable, or else it won't want to turn at all and you won't be able to do a gravity turn. Every rocket will have a different "sweet spot" of stability for the best gravity turn. You need to do test flights, revert, tweak your design until you get it right.

**Ascent Profile**

Once you've implemented the above design items, follow these steps for your ascent:

1. Turn on SAS and set your throttle to whatever will give you a TWR of ~1.5.
2. Launch. As soon as you hit 50 m/s, perform a [pitch-over maneuver](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravity_turn#Vertical_climb) to begin your gravity turn. To do this, tip your rocket towards the East *slightly*, until it is pointing between 5° to 10°. The higher your thrust and the more aerodynamically stable your rocket is, the more you need to pitch over initially. Remember, higher thrust makes the rocket want to go straight, as does aerodynamic stability. Don't start pitching over before your speed is ~50 m/s, otherwise you will likely find yourself horizontal within a few seconds, as your winglets won't be biting into the air hard enough to provide stability.
3. As soon as your SAS stabilizes (i.e. the control input arrows on the bottom left are all centered) turn off the SAS. Watch closely for this moment, as you will have only a small window of a few seconds at most before the SAS starts trying to resist the gravity turn; turning SAS off while it's trying to steer will cause your rocket to become unstable and lose its heading or possibly break up. Your SAS should be off by the time your velocity is around 100m/s. If you take too long and your rocket is going too fast by the time you're done, it won't want to continue turning (fast rockets like to go straight, remember?) and you'll have to force the turn manually, which is inefficient and causes stress on your craft. As mentioned above, a gravity turn should happen on its own and not as a result of control input. For particularly unwieldy rockets, you can lock SAS to prograde instead of turning it off during this phase. However, stock SAS is far from perfect and it's best to let gravity and aerodynamic forces do the steering for you.
4. Enjoy the view while your prograde marker gradually sinks towards the horizon, your rocket will follow on its own thanks to gravity and aerodynamic forces. Try to avoid control inputs during this phase (i.e. no AWSD), just let it fly. If you need to make adjustments, use throttle. Remember, lower thrust means the rocket turns more, higher thrust makes it want to go straight. At 10 km altitude you should be pointing roughly between 60° and 45° and your speed should be around 500 m/s(slower for larger rockets, light ones can go a bit faster). If at 10 km altitude you're still pointing above 60°, your TWR was too high and you went too fast, your pitch-over maneuver was too gentle, and/or your rocket is too aerodynamically stable. Next time throttle down more, make a more aggressive pitch-over maneuver, and/or use less wings at the back. On the other hand, if you're pointing below 45° at 10 km, you went too slow, your pitch-over maneuver was too aggressive, and/or your rocket is not aerodynamically stable enough. Next time use higher thrust, do a gentler pitch-over maneuver, and/or add more wings at the back.
5. As you hit the upper atmosphere, drag will become negligible and you should start leveling out your trajectory as much as possible to gain horizontal speed. Any time you're burning above the horizon you're wasting part of your thrust to gravity. You can also go faster here without losing too much energy to drag and without worrying too much about heat. At around 40 km, turn SAS back on, start steering manually and begin throttling up. The higher your thrust the more horizontal you can afford to go. If you go too horizontal or don't throttle up enough, you might not be able to push your apoapsis (Ap) above 70km before you start falling back to Kerbin. On the other hand, if you throttle up too much before you're pointing horizontally, you will waste energy fighting gravity instead of gaining horizontal speed. My rule of thumb here is to keep your Ap around 45 seconds in front of you. You can check for this info in map view by mousing over the Ap indicator, or if you have KER it will show on your left HUD, or if you have MechJeb it will be in the orbit information window. If your time to Ap is more than 45 sec, throttle down and/or point more horizontal, and vice versa. Be careful though; if you're upper stage has low thrust, you might need to keep your Ap a bit further out to make sure you don't start falling before you hit orbital velocity. Play it safe and only let your Ap come closer if you're confident you have enough thrust. Continue adjusting pitch and throttle until your Ap reaches your desired altitude, at which point you can cut your engines, coast to Ap and circularize.

**Advanced Mode**

Try doing the ascent and orbital insertion in a continuous burn. This is the most efficient profile (citation needed) and it's *extremely *satisfying. Easier said than done, though. To pull it off, you need to allow your time to Ap to creep closer and closer during step 5, while not allow it to get higher than your intended orbital altitude. You do this by reducing throttle and lowering your pitch in a more aggressive manner. The closer you are to orbital velocity, the closer you can allow yourself to get to your Ap. You want to hit orbital velocity exactly at Ap. There will be much trial and error and the exact procedure will vary from rocket to rocket, but give it a try!